# BASIC SORTS

1. Bubble sort - sometimes referred to as sinking sort, is a simple sorting algorithm that repeatedly steps through the input list element by element, comparing the current element with the one after it, swapping their values if needed. The first loop trough the list sorts elements locally and moves the biggest element to the end of list. Then we start over and move items once again (the second biggest element should land on the one before last spot in the list). And we repeat the process for rest of the elements. For first step we do n operations (where n is the number of items in the list) and for subsequent ones we do n - 1 (because we sorted the element on the end, we don't need to compare the next elements to the biggest element in the list). So the amount of work will dwindling with each loop because if we already sorted 7 elements on the end we have only n - 7 elements to loop over and compare in this given loop. The big O for bubble sort is O($n^2$).

2. Selection sort - in this algorithm we are comparing given element to all other elements to find the smallest one. We then move this item (smaller then the item we are currently comparing to) to the beginning and this item is sorted. We repeat the process with all other slots until all the items are sorted. Important to note is that in the subsequent runs we don't have to compare items before the slot we are trying to now fill up (because they are already sorted). Selection sort big O is O($n^2$).

3. Insertion sort - in this algorithm we are comparing given item to all the items before it and try to find the items that are bigger then our item (we always start from the second item). If the items before are bigger we are looping until we find an item, that is smaller then our given item (there is also possibility that we have reached the beginning of our array and then we drop it there) and we drop it there. We repeat the process until there is no items left to be sorted. This algorithm goes over all the items few times and just like in selection sort its big O is O($n^2$). But in some cases (when for example we have almost sorted array) the sorting will be O(n) in the best case scenario.
